#summary Guide for Required Server-Side Processing

= Server-Side Processing =
==!WebSocket==
===Handling message===
If Stream object receives a non-string data, the stream creates a query string representing that data by using {{{jQuery.param}}} and transmits it to the server. Therefore, the server-side application should decode the query string as if handles HTTP POST request's body.

*Example:* Creating a parameters map in Jetty 8 (Java Servlet Container)
{{{
@Override
// Called with a complete text message when all fragments have been received.
public void onMessage(String queryString) {
    Map<String, List<String>> parameters = parseQueryString(queryString);

    Map<String, String> data = new LinkedHashMap<String, String>();
    data.put("username", parameters.get("username").get(0));
    data.put("message", parameters.get("message").get(0));
    
    // ...
}

private Map<String, List<String>> parseQueryString(String data) {
    Map<String, List<String>> answer = new LinkedHashMap<String, List<String>>();
    for (String parameter : data.split("&")) {
        String[] entities = parameter.split("=");
        try {
            String key = URLDecoder.decode(entities[0], "utf-8");
            if (!answer.containsKey(key)) {
                answer.put(key, new ArrayList<String>());
            }

            answer.get(key).add(URLDecoder.decode(entities[1], "utf-8"));
        } catch (UnsupportedEncodingException e) {
            throw new RuntimeException(e);
        }
    }

    return answer;
}
}}}

==HTTP Streaming==
===Prerequisite===

When the server receives HTTP GET request, it must respond meeting the following requirements. 

====Rejecting !WebSocket Opening Handshake====

The server supporting only HTTP Streaming may receive !WebSocket opening handshake. For specific processing, it have to be ignored.

====Response Header====

 <b>Content-Type</b> - Set to 'text/plain' that is the only one satisfying all streaming transport.

 <b>Access-Control-Allow-Origin</b> - Set to either {{{*}}} or the exact URL of the requesting web page. This header enables response to be shared cross domain, but not cross-domain comet because of obsolete browsers that does not support it. It's just XDomainRequest transport's requirement. For detail information about header, see [http://www.w3.org/TR/access-control/ Cross-Origin Resource Sharing].

====Response Format====

 <b>Id</b> - For further communication, the stream connection id have to be generated and printed at the top of response. It must be unique within the server until the stream closes, so random number (or UUID) is ideal. It must end with a semicolon (;). The id and padding have to be transmitted to the client together. Generated id is managed and used by jQuery Stream.

 <b>Padding</b> - The padding is needed by XMLHttpRequest of !WebKit, XDomainRequest and Hidden iframe transport. One kilobyte is usually enough. it have to end with a semicolon (;). If the browser receives response including id and padding, jQuery Stream handles it and fires open event.

*Example:* Meeting HTTP Streaming prerequisites in Java
{{{
protected void doGet(HttpServletRequest request, HttpServletResponse response)
        throws ServletException, IOException {

    // Rejects WebSocket opening handshake
    if ("websocket".equalsIgnoreCase(request.getHeader("Upgrade"))) {
        // 501 Not Implemented
        response.sendError(501);
        return;
    }

    response.setCharacterEncoding("utf-8");

    // Content-Type header
    response.setContentType("text/plain");

    // Access-Control-Allow-Origin header
    response.setHeader("Access-Control-Allow-Origin", "*");

    PrintWriter writer = response.getWriter();

    // Id
    String id = UUID.randomUUID().toString();
    writer.print(id);
    writer.print(';');

    // Padding
    for (int i = 0; i < 1024; i++) {
        writer.print(' ');
    }
    writer.print(';');
    writer.flush();

    // ...
}
}}}
===Sending message===
A message to be sent to client consists of size part and data part. The size part contains message's length and the data part contains message itself. Each part must end with a semicolon (;). Every time a message arrived, jQuery Stream handles it and fires message event.

*Example:* Method sending message in Java
{{{
private void sendMessage(AsyncContext asyncContext, String message) throws IOException {
    PrintWriter writer = asyncContext.getResponse().getWriter();
    writer.print(message.length());
    writer.print(";");
    writer.print(message);
    writer.print(";");
    writer.flush();
}
}}}
===Handling message===
HTTP POST request contains data sent by client via stream and every request has metadata which is parameters starting with {{{metadata.}}}. The following types of requests indicated by {{{metadata.type}}} parameter are sent by jQuery Stream.

====Send====
Dealing with {{{send}}} request created by calling {{{send}}} method of Stream object in browser is depending on your server-side application.

====Close====
{{{close}}} request is notification that browser closed a stream, therefore the server have to finish that stream to avoid the waste of server resources.

*Example:* Handling message in Java
{{{
protected void doPost(HttpServletRequest request, HttpServletResponse response)
        throws ServletException, IOException {
    request.setCharacterEncoding("utf-8");

    AsyncContext ac = asyncContexts.get(request.getParameter("metadata.id"));
    if (ac == null) {
        return;
    }

    // Close
    if ("close".equals(request.getParameter("metadata.type"))) {
        ac.complete();
        return;
    }

    // Send
    String message = request.getParameter("message");
    PrintWriter writer = ac.getResponse().getWriter();

    writer.print(message.length() + ";" + message + ";");
    writer.flush();
}
}}}